Add in-place upgrade explanation (#770)
canonical/k8s-snap: docs/src/capi/explanation/in-place-upgrades.md

# In-Place Upgrades

Regularly upgrading the Kubernetes version of the machines in a cluster 
is important. While rolling upgrades are a popular strategy, certain 
situations will require in-place upgrades:

- Resource constraints (i.e. cost of additional machines).
- Expensive manual setup process for nodes.

## Annotations

CAPI machines are considered immutable. Consequently, machines are replaced 
instead of reconfigured.
While CAPI doesn't support in-place upgrades, {{product}} CAPI does 
by leveraging annotations for the implementation.
For a deeper understanding of the CAPI design decisions, consider reading about 
[machine immutability in CAPI][1], and Kubernetes objects: [`labels`][2], 
[`spec` and `status`][3].

## Controllers

In {{product}} CAPI, there are two main types of controllers that handle the 
process of performing in-place upgrades:

- Single Machine In-Place Upgrade Controller
- Orchestrated In-Place Upgrade Controller

> The core component of performing an in-place upgrade is the “Single Machine 
> Upgrader”. It watches for certain annotations on machines and reconciles 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The core component of performing an in-place upgrade is the `Single Machine 
Upgrader`. It watches for certain annotations on machines and reconciles 
```

> Upgrader”. It watches for certain annotations on machines and reconciles 
> them to make sure the upgrades happen as expected. As its name suggests, 
> it reconciles each machine individually, considers the machines separately 
> and does not assume any relation between them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Upgrader”. The controller watches for annotations on machines and reconciles 
them to ensure the upgrades happen smoothly. 
```
Since the name suggests this we don't need to write it out- I think it becomes clear this is the single machine controller vs in the Orchestrator :)

> The “Orchestrator” watches for certain annotations on 
> machine owners, reconciles them and upgrades groups of owned machines. 
> It’s responsible for making sure that all the machines owned by the 
> reconciled object get upgraded successfully.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `Orchestrator` watches for certain annotations on 
machine owners, reconciles them and upgrades groups of owned machines. 
It’s responsible for ensuring that all the machines owned by the 
reconciled object get upgraded successfully.
```

The main annotations that drive the upgrade process are as follows:

- `v1beta2.k8sd.io/in-place-upgrade-to` --> `upgrade-to` : Instructs 
the controller to perform an upgrade with the specified option/method. 

> This is the only annotation that users need to put on the objects.

Reviewer: Let's remove this and put `(optional)` next to the other tags.

Author: I don't think we should do this, since the others are not "optional", do are set by the controller itself. The user only needs to set `upgrade-to` and the controller will handle the rest of them.

- `v1beta2.k8sd.io/in-place-upgrade-status` --> `status` : As soon as the 

> controller starts the upgrade process, the object will be marked with this 
> annotation to indicate the status of the upgrade. It can either be 
> `in-progress`, `failed` or `done`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
controller starts the upgrade process, the object will be marked with the `status` 
annotation which can either be `in-progress`, `failed` or `done`.
```

revision, or install a new snap from a file already placed on the 
machine to make up for air-gapped environments.

A successfully upgraded machine shows the following annotations:

```yaml
annotations:
  v1beta2.k8sd.io/in-place-upgrade-release: "channel=1.31/stable"
  v1beta2.k8sd.io/in-place-upgrade-status: "done"
```

If the upgrade fails, the controller will mark the machine and retry 
the upgrade immediately:

```yaml
annotations:
  # the `upgrade-to` causes the retry to happen
  v1beta2.k8sd.io/in-place-upgrade-to: "channel=1.31/stable"
  v1beta2.k8sd.io/in-place-upgrade-status: "failed"

  # orchestrator will notice this annotation and knows that the 
  # upgrade for this machine failed
  v1beta2.k8sd.io/in-place-upgrade-last-failed-attempt-at: "Sat, 7 Nov 
  2024 13:30:00 +0400"
```

By applying and removing annotations, the single machine 
upgrader determines the upgrade status of the machine it’s trying to 
reconcile and takes necessary actions to successfully complete an 
in-place upgrade. The following diagram shows the flow of the in-place 
upgrade of a single machine:

![Diagram][img-single-machine]

### Machine Upgrade Process

> The {{product}}'s `k8sd` daemon is exposes endpoints that can be used to 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The {{product}}'s `k8sd` daemon exposes endpoints that can be used to 
```

interact with the cluster. The single machine upgrader calls the  
`/snap/refresh` endpoint on the machine to trigger the upgrade 
process while checking `/snap/refresh-status` periodically. 

![Diagram][img-k8sd-call]

### In-place upgrades on large workload clusters

While the “Single Machine In-Place Upgrade Controller” is responsible 
for upgrading individual machines, the "Orchestrated In-Place Upgrade 
Controller" ensures that groups of machines will get upgraded.
By applying the `upgrade-to` annotation on an object that owns machines 
(e.g. a `MachineDeployment`), this controller will mark the owned machines 
one by one which will cause the "Single Machine Upgrader" to pickup those 
annotations and upgrade the machines. To avoid undesirable situations
 like quorum loss or severe downtime, these upgrades happen in sequence. 

> Failure and success of individual machine upgrades will be reported back 
> to the orchestrator by the single machine upgrader via annotations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The failures and successes of individual machine upgrades will be reported back 
to the orchestrator by the single machine upgrader via annotations.
```

> To paint a better picture, let’s have a look the flow of orchestrated 
> in-place upgrades:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The illustrated flow of orchestrated in-place upgrades:
```

# In-Place Upgrades

Regularly upgrading the Kubernetes version of the machines in a cluster 
is important. While rolling upgrades a popular strategy, certain situations 
will require in-place upgrades:

- Resource constraints (i.e. cost of additional machines).
- Expensive manual setup process for nodes.

## Annotations

CAPI machines are considered immutable. Consequently, machines are replaced 
instead of reconfigured.
While CAPI doesn't support in-place upgrades, {{product}} CAPI does 
by leveraging annotations for the implementation.
For more information about CAPI design decisions, have a look at the 
following:

- [Machine immutability in CAPI][1]
- [Kubernetes objects: `labels`][2]
- [Kubernetes objects: `spec` and `status`][3]

## Controllers

In {{product}} CAPI, there are two main types of controllers that handle the 
process of performing in-place upgrades:

> - Single Machine In-Place Upgrade Controller
> - Orchestrated In-Place Upgrade Controller

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Single Machine Upgrade Controller
- Orchestrated Upgrade Controller
```
Can we simplify the names? We refer to them later as such in the next paragraph. 
Double check that this name is the same as the one in your pictures.

Author: I think it's better to leave them here, the pictures already have this in their names.

Reviewer: Okay that's fine.

The core component of performing an in-place upgrade is the “Single Machine 
Upgrader”. It watches for certain annotations on machines and reconciles 
them to make sure the upgrades happen as expected. As its name suggests, 
it reconciles each machine individually, considers the machines separately 

> and does not assume any sort of relation between them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and does not assume any relation between them.
```

> The “Orchestrator” on the other hand, watches for certain annotations on 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The “Orchestrator” watches for certain annotations on 
```

machine owners, reconciles them and upgrades groups of owned machines. 
It’s responsible for making sure that all the machines owned by the 
reconciled object get upgraded successfully.

> The main annotations that drive the upgrade process are as follows (for a 
> complete and up-to-date list of these annotations and their values please 
> refer to [annotations reference page][4]):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main annotations that drive the upgrade process are as follows:
```

- `v1beta2.k8sd.io/in-place-upgrade-to` --> `upgrade-to` : Instructs 
the controller to perform an upgrade with the specified option/method. 
This is the only annotation that users need to put on the objects.
- `v1beta2.k8sd.io/in-place-upgrade-status` --> `status` : As soon as the 
controller starts the upgrade process, the object will be marked with this 
annotation to indicate the status of the upgrade. It can either be 
`in-progress`, `failed` or `done`.
- `v1beta2.k8sd.io/in-place-upgrade-release` --> `release` : When the 
upgrade is performed successfully, this annotation will indicate the current 
Kubernetes release/version installed on the machine.

> Note that abbreviations of these labels are used to make this article more
>  readable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a complete list of annotations and their values please 
refer to the [annotations reference page][4]. This explanation proceeds to use abbreviations of the mentioned labels.
```

### Single Machine In-Place Upgrade Controller

The Machine objects can be marked with the `upgrade-to` annotation to 

> trigger an in-place upgrade for that machine. The single machine upgrader 
> (which is watching for changes on machines), notices this annotation 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
trigger an in-place upgrade for that machine. While
watching for changes on the machines, the single machine upgrade controller notices this annotation 
```

and attempts to upgrade the Kubernetes version of that machine to the 
specified version.

> Upgrade methods or options can be specified to upgrade to a snap channel, 
> revision, or install a new snap from a file already placed on the 
> machine to make up for air-gapped environments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Upgrade methods or options can be specified to upgrade to a snap channel, 
revision, or a local snap file already placed on the 
machine in air-gapped environments.
```

Reviewer: This needs to get applied :)

A successfully upgraded machine shows the following annotations:

```yaml
annotations:
  v1beta2.k8sd.io/in-place-upgrade-release: "channel=1.31/stable"
  v1beta2.k8sd.io/in-place-upgrade-status: "done"
```

If the upgrade fails, the controller will mark the machine and retry 
the upgrade immediately:

```yaml
annotations:
  # the `upgrade-to` causes the retry to happen
  v1beta2.k8sd.io/in-place-upgrade-to: "channel=1.31/stable"
  v1beta2.k8sd.io/in-place-upgrade-status: "failed"

  # orchestrator will notice this annotation and knows that the 
  # upgrade for this machine failed
  v1beta2.k8sd.io/in-place-upgrade-last-failed-attempt-at: "Sat, 7 Nov 
  2024 13:30:00 +0400"
```

> For the detailed implementation of this controller, make sure to 
> checkout the [{{product}} CAPI repository][capi-repo].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Overall, by applying and removing annotations, the single machine 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By applying and removing annotations, the single machine 
```

upgrader determines the upgrade status of the machine it’s trying to 
reconcile and takes necessary actions to successfully complete an 
in-place upgrade. The following diagram shows the flow of the in-place 
upgrade of a single machine:

![Diagram][img-single-machine]

### Machine Upgrade Process

> {{product}} has a daemon running in the background called the `k8sd`. 
> It’s responsible for many things in the context of {{product}} but 
> one of them is to expose certain endpoints that can be used to 
> interact with the cluster. The single machine upgrader calls the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The {{product}}'s `k8sd` daemon is exposes endpoints that can be used to 
interact with the cluster. The single machine upgrader calls the 
```

> `/snap/refresh` endpoint on the machine that it’s trying to upgrade. 
> This endpoint call will trigger the “actual” upgrade process and in 
> the meantime, the `/snap/refresh-status` will be called periodically 
> by the single machine upgrader to see how things are going. It’s worth 
> noting that ensuring secure communication between the single machine 
> upgrader and the {{product}} daemon (k8sd) is really important and 
> something that is handled internally as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`/snap/refresh` endpoint on the machine to trigger the upgrade process while checking `/snap/refresh-status` periodically. 
```
IMHO, we can remove the note on secure communication.

![Diagram][img-k8sd-call]

### In-place upgrades on large workload clusters

While the “Single Machine In-Place Upgrade Controller” is responsible 
for upgrading individual machines, the "Orchestrated In-Place Upgrade 

> Controller" makes sure that groups of machines will get upgraded.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Controller" ensures that groups of machines will get upgraded.
```

By applying the `upgrade-to` annotation on an object that owns machines 
(e.g. a `MachineDeployment`), this controller will mark the owned machines 
one by one which will cause the "Single Machine Upgrader" to pickup those 

> annotations and upgrade the machines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
annotations and upgrade the machines. To avoid undesirable situations like quorum loss or severe downtime, these upgrades happen in sequence. 
```

Failure and success of individual machine upgrades will be reported back 
to the orchestrator by the single machine upgrader via annotations.

To paint a better picture, let’s have a look the flow of orchestrated 
in-place upgrades:

![Diagram][img-orchestrated]

> 
> #### (Optional) Locking The Upgrade Process
> 
> The controllers ensure that only a single machine 
> is going to get upgraded at the same time.
> This is to prevent undesirable situations like quorum loss or severe downtimes. 
> 
> {{product}} CAPI uses a lock to ensure only 1 control plane machine is 
> getting upgraded at a given time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Collapsing this into the previous paragraph.

# In-Place Upgrades

Regularly upgrading the Kubernetes version of the machines in a cluster 
is important. While rolling upgrades a popular strategy, certain situations 
may demand in-place upgrades:

- Resource constraints (i.e. cost of additional machines).
- Expensive manual setup process for nodes.

## Annotations

CAPI machines are considered immutable. Consequently, machines are replaced 
instead of reconfigured.
While CAPI doesn't support in-place upgrades, {{product}} CAPI does 
by leveraging annotations for the implementation.
For more information about CAPI design decisions, have a look at the 
following:

- [Machine immutability in CAPI][1]
- [Kubernetes objects: `labels`][2]
- [Kubernetes objects: `spec` and `status`][3]

## Controllers

> In {{product}} CAPI, we have two main types of controllers that handle the 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In {{product}} CAPI, there are two main types of controllers that handle the 
```

the meantime, the `/snap/refresh-status` will be called periodically 
by the single machine upgrader to see how things are going. It’s worth 
noting that ensuring secure communication between the single machine 
upgrader and the {{product}} daemon (k8sd) is really important and 
something that is handled internally as well.

![Diagram][img-k8sd-call]

### In-place upgrades on large workload clusters

While the “Single Machine In-Place Upgrade Controller” is responsible 
for upgrading individual machines, the "Orchestrated In-Place Upgrade 
Controller" makes sure that groups of machines will get upgraded.
By applying the `upgrade-to` annotation on an object that owns machines 
(e.g. a `MachineDeployment`), this controller will mark the owned machines 
one by one which will cause the "Single Machine Upgrader" to pickup those 
annotations and upgrade the machines.

Failure and success of individual machine upgrades will be reported back 
to the orchestrator by the single machine upgrader via annotations.

To paint a better picture, let’s have a look the flow of orchestrated 
in-place upgrades:

![Diagram][img-orchestrated]

#### (Optional) Locking The Upgrade Process

> There might be scenarios where we need to make sure that only a limited 

Reviewer 2: Be more assertive here too
```suggestion
The controller ensures that only a limited...
```

# In-Place Upgrades

> Upgrading the Kubernetes version of the machines is sometimes a necessity. 
> Rolling upgrades are the most popular way to go, but in certain situations 
> we might want or need to go with an in-place upgrade. Examples of these 
> situations are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Regularly upgrading the Kubernetes version of the machines in a cluster is important. 
While rolling upgrades a popular strategy, certain situations 
may demand in-place upgrades:
```
Try and focus your text more, as you write something ask yourself about each piece: is this valuable information or just nice fluff. The art here is to convey the minimum information in a way that still flows nicely.

As a second note, make statements that are confident and avoid `sometimes` and `might want ` etc.

> - Resource constraints (i.e. we can not afford spawning new machines).
> - Costly and manual setup process for each machine which we can not afford.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Resource constraints (i.e. cost of additional machines).
- Expensive manual setup process for nodes.
```

> In this section we're going to see how the orchestrated in-place upgrades 
> work in {{product}} CAPI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
This isn't new information we're in the CAPI section of the docs.

## Annotations

> In CAPI, machines are considered immutable. They can not be changed once 
> they’re created. In order to change a machine, according to CAPI design 
> decisions, we must replace it with a new one. Quoting from [CAPI concepts][1]:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CAPI machines are considered immutable. Consequently, machines are replaced instead of reconfigured.
```

> From the perspective of Cluster API, all Machines are immutable: once 
they are created, they are never updated (except for labels, annotations and 
status), only deleted.

{{product}} CAPI leverages the fact that "annotations" can be changed on 
an already created machine. As we will later see in details, we can perform 
an in-place upgrade by changing a machine’s annotations. Changing “labels” 
or “status” does not make much sense, as the former is mostly used as a 
[grouping/organization mechanism][2] and the latter is [supplied and updated 
by Kubernetes][3].

That being said, the whole idea of doing an in-place upgrade might not be 
completely aligned with the upstream cluster API design decisions as we’re 
essentially changing a machine’s Kubernetes version, something that’s 
supposed to be achieved by doing a rolling upgrade (replacing old ones). 
Either way, having the ability to perform an in-place upgrade comes with 
many benefits, so we decided to design and implement a way to enable users 

> perform these upgrades with minimum friction.

Reviewer: This is too much information for the user. 
Let's just point to upstream docs for the curious and say something like:
While CAPI doesn't support in-place upgrades, Canonical Kubernetes CAPI does by leveraging annotations for the implementation.

## Controllers

> In {{product}} CAPI, we have two main types of controllers that handle the 

Reviewer: Avoid using `we` in docs.

process of performing in-place upgrades:

- Single Machine In-Place Upgrade Controller
- Orchestrated In-Place Upgrade Controller

The core component of performing an in-place upgrade is the “Single Machine 
Upgrader”. It watches for certain annotations on machines and reconciles 
them to make sure the upgrades happen as expected. As its name suggests, 
it reconciles each machine individually, considers the machines separately 
and does not assume any sort of relation between them.

The “Orchestrator” on the other hand, watches for certain annotations on 
machine owners, reconciles them and upgrades groups of owned machines. 
It’s responsible for making sure that all the machines owned by the 
reconciled object get upgraded successfully.

The main annotations that drive the upgrade process are as follows (for a 
complete and up-to-date list of these annotations and their values please 
refer to [annotations reference page][4]):

> - `v1beta2.k8sd.io/in-place-upgrade-to` : Instructs the controller to 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `v1beta2.k8sd.io/in-place-upgrade-to` --> `upgrade-to` : Instructs the controller to 
```
Let's collapse the below section into this part.

perform an upgrade with the specified option/method. This is the only 
annotation that we as the users need to put on the objects.
- `v1beta2.k8sd.io/in-place-upgrade-status`: As soon as the controller 
starts the upgrade process, the object will be marked with this 
annotation to indicate the status of the upgrade. It can either be 
`in-progress`, `failed` or `done`.
- `v1beta2.k8sd.io/in-place-upgrade-release`: When the upgrade is 
performed successfully, this annotation will indicate the current 

> Kubernetes release/version installed on the machine.

Reviewer: Let's make this focused on what the user needs to know. This can probably be half in length once condensed.

From now on, let's use the following abbreviations to make this article 
shorter and more readable:

- `v1beta2.k8sd.io/in-place-upgrade-to` --> `upgrade-to`
- `v1beta2.k8sd.io/in-place-upgrade-status` --> `status`
- `v1beta2.k8sd.io/in-place-upgrade-release` --> `release`
- `v1beta2.k8sd.io/in-place-upgrade-last-failed-attempt-at` --> 
`last-failed-attempt-at`

### Single Machine In-Place Upgrade Controller

The Machine objects can be marked with the `upgrade-to` annotation to 
trigger an in-place upgrade for that machine. As an example, let’s say 
we have a machine with `1.30/stable` Kubernetes snap installed on it. 
To initiate an in-place upgrade for this machine, we can annotate it 
with `upgrade-to: channel=1.31/stable`. The single machine upgrader 
(which is watching for changes on machines), notices this annotation 
and attempts to upgrade the Kubernetes version of that machine to the 

> specified version.

Reviewer: Remove/reduce this, people can read the yaml in the following section.

Because {{product}} is shipped in a snap package, performing an upgrade 
can be as easy as doing a `snap refresh`. Upgrade methods or options 
can be specified to upgrade to a snap channel, revision, or install a 
new snap from a file already placed on the machine to make up for 

> air-gapped environments.

Reviewer: link snap refresh docs instead of duplicating the explanation here.

> When the upgrade is finished successfully, we will notice (at least) the 
> following annotations on the machine:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A successfully upgraded machine shows the following annotations:
```

```yaml
annotations:
  v1beta2.k8sd.io/in-place-upgrade-release: "channel=1.31/stable"
  v1beta2.k8sd.io/in-place-upgrade-status: "done"
```

> If the upgrade fails, the controller will mark the machine with the 
> following annotations and retry immediately:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the upgrade fails, the controller will mark the machine and retry the upgrade immediately:
```

```yaml
annotations:
  # the `upgrade-to` causes the retry to happen
  v1beta2.k8sd.io/in-place-upgrade-to: "channel=1.31/stable"
  v1beta2.k8sd.io/in-place-upgrade-status: "failed"

  # orchestrator will notice this annotation and knows that the 
  # upgrade for this machine failed
  v1beta2.k8sd.io/in-place-upgrade-last-failed-attempt-at: "Sat, 7 Nov 
  2024 13:30:00 +0400"
```

For the detailed implementation of this controller, make sure to 

> checkout the [{{product}} CAPI repository][capi-repo].

Reviewer: I would remove this, if anything add a link in the beginning where you mention the controller.

Overall, by applying and removing annotations, the single machine 
upgrader determines the upgrade status of the machine it’s trying to 
reconcile and takes necessary actions to successfully complete an 
in-place upgrade. The following diagram shows the flow of the in-place 

> upgrade of a single machine:

Reviewer: Reduce

```{figure} ../../assets/in-place-upgrades/single-machine.png
   :width: 100%
   :alt: Single Machine In-Place Upgrade Flow

   Single Machine In-Place Upgrade Flow
```

### Machine Upgrade Process

{{product}} has a daemon running in the background called the `k8sd`. 
It’s responsible for many things in the context of {{product}} but 
one of them is to expose certain endpoints that can be used to 
interact with the cluster. The single machine upgrader calls the 
`/snap/refresh` endpoint on the machine that it’s trying to upgrade. 
This endpoint call will trigger the “actual” upgrade process and in 
the meantime, the `/snap/refresh-status` will be called periodically 
by the single machine upgrader to see how things are going. It’s worth 
noting that ensuring secure communication between the single machine 
upgrader and the {{product}} daemon (k8sd) is really important and 
something that is handled internally as well.

```{figure} ../../assets/in-place-upgrades/k8sd-call.png
   :width: 100%
   :alt: Single Machine In-Place Upgrade Controller Calling The `k8sd` 
   Endpoints

   Single Machine In-Place Upgrade Controller Calling The `k8sd` Endpoints

> ```

Reviewer: This is more an implementation detail, does the user really need to know this?

Author: Maybe I'm wrong, but when I think of the audience of an explanation I'm not necessarily thinking about someone that is reading this "just to understand how to work *with* it, or how to operate this product". I think that is what a "How to" is for. I think of an "Explanation" as something that will help people understand how and why this thing is working underneath, something like a _can you tell me about...?._

Quoting from [Diataxes](https://www.diataxis.fr/explanation/):
> Explanation deepens and broadens the reader’s understanding of a subject. It brings clarity, light and context.
>
> Explanation - understanding oriented, theoretical knowledge, that serves our study
> The concept of reflection is important. Reflection occurs after something else, and depends on something else, yet at the same time brings something new - shines a new light - on the subject matter.
>
> The perspective of explanation is higher and wider than that of the other not types. It does not take the user’s eye-level view, as in a how-to guide, or a close-up view of the machinery, like reference material. Its scope in each case is a topic - “an area of knowledge”, that somehow has to be bounded in a reasonable, meaningful way.
> For the user, explanation joins things together. It’s an answer to the question: Can you tell me about …?
>
> It’s documentation that it makes sense to read while away from the product itself (one could say, explanation is the only kind of documentation that it might make sense to read in the bath).

Author: And I would argue that this implementation detail is very unlikely to change. I mean the exact endpoints _might_ (e.g. `/snap/refresh-status`), but I don't think the `k8sd` is going anywhere. So I believe this won't rot as well.

those machines. In CAPI, we mostly have two main machine groups in 
our workload cluster: “control-plane-node machines” and “worker-node 
machines”.

Let’s say we want to upgrade all of our worker nodes. In this case, we 
only need to annotate the `MachineDeployment` object. The orchestrated 
upgrade controller watches for the `upgrade-to` annotation on the 
`MachineDeployment` and will trigger an in-place upgrade for all of 
its owned machines by annotating them one by one. The responsibility 
is then delegated to the single machine upgrader to make sure each 
individual machine is getting upgraded successfully. The orchestrator 
is only there to keep track of the upgrade status of these machines.
If any of the machines fail to get upgraded, the orchestrator marks 
the owner (here, `MachineDeployment`) with the respective annotations 
(`status: failed` and `last-failed-attempt-at`), publishes helpful 
and informative events and trusts the single machine controller to do 
the retry and eventually succeed. When all the owned machines are 
upgraded as expected, the orchestrator considers the operation successful, 
marks the owner with `release` and `status: done` and steps down.

> To paint a better picture, let’s have a look the flow of the orchestrator:

Reviewer: Let's reduce/remove a good chunk of this. 

Rename the section to `In-place upgrades on large workload clusters`.
Then add 2-3 sentences max and then your picture explains the rest.

```{figure} ../../assets/in-place-upgrades/orchestrated.png
   :width: 100%
   :alt: Orchestrated In-Place Upgrade Flow

   Orchestrated In-Place Upgrade Flow
```

> 
> For the detailed implementation of this controller, make sure to check out 
> the [{{product}} CAPI repository][capi-repo].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> #### Locking The Upgrade Process

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### (Optional) Locking The Upgrade Process
```

There might be scenarios where we need to make sure that only a limited 
number of machines are going to get upgraded at the same time. An example 
might be upgrading control plane machines. If multiple nodes become 
unavailable due to getting upgraded, we might lose quorum, experience severe 
downtime, or end up in an undesirable state that is very costly to get out of.

Let’s say we only want to allow a single upgrade at any given point (no 
parallel upgrades). A lock or a semaphore can be implemented to ensure 
that the orchestrator is not going to trigger an upgrade for multiple 
machines, even if multiple instances of the orchestrator are reconciling 
the same object in parallel. Note that this implementation can be 
generalized to allow `n` upgrades at the same time, instead of only 1.

For the detailed implementation of the locking process, make sure to 
checkout the [{{product}} CAPI repository][capi-repo].

> 

Reviewer: As a user all I care about is where do I configure `n`, please add that explanation and remove the details.

Author: Well, for now it can't be configured :)

Reviewer: Alright, then let's remove this until we have a way to configure it.

> ## Conclusion
> 
> Provisioning a cluster can be challenging. Trying to upgrade the machines 
> of that cluster without carefully engineered tools can get out of hand 
> pretty quickly. In-Place Upgrade Controllers that come out of the box with 
> {{product}} CAPI providers can take a huge burden off our shoulders by 
> taking care of the upgrade process in a responsive, self-healing and 
> cloud-native way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
This is nice fluff but not critical for understanding in-place upgrades.

`/snap/refresh` endpoint on the machine that it’s trying to upgrade. 
This endpoint call will trigger the “actual” upgrade process and in 
the meantime, the `/snap/refresh-status` will be called periodically 
by the single machine upgrader to see how things are going. It’s worth 
noting that ensuring secure communication between the single machine 
upgrader and the {{product}} daemon (k8sd) is really important and 
something that is handled internally as well.

```{figure} ../../assets/in-place-upgrades/k8sd-call.png
   :width: 100%
   :alt: Single Machine In-Place Upgrade Controller Calling The `k8sd` 
   Endpoints

   Single Machine In-Place Upgrade Controller Calling The `k8sd` Endpoints
```

### Orchestrated In-Place Upgrade Controller

While the “Single Machine In-Place Upgrade Controller” is responsible 
for upgrading individual machines, if our workload cluster is made up 
of tens, hundreds, or thousands of nodes, annotating them one by one and 
keeping track of their statuses, failures, reasons and errors can become 
a daunting or even impossible task. “Orchestrated In-Place Upgrade 
Controller” to the rescue!

> The main idea behind this class of controllers is to enable us upgrade 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The main idea behind this class of controllers is to enable us to upgrade 
```

multiple machines by only annotating a single object: the owner of 
those machines. In CAPI, we mostly have two main machine groups in 
our workload cluster: “control-plane-node machines” and “worker-node 
machines”.

Let’s say we want to upgrade all of our worker nodes. In this case, we 
only need to annotate the `MachineDeployment` object. The orchestrated 
upgrade controller watches for the `upgrade-to` annotation on the 
`MachineDeployment` and will trigger an in-place upgrade for all of 
its owned machines by annotating them one by one. The responsibility 
is then delegated to the single machine upgrader to make sure each 
individual machine is getting upgraded successfully. The orchestrator 

> is only there to keep track of the upgrade status of these machines, 
> reported by the single machine upgrader (by annotating the machine). 

Reviewer 3: I feel like this sentence just repeats what was just said.
```suggestion
is only there to keep track of the upgrade status of these machines. 
```

If any of the machines fail to get upgraded, the orchestrator marks 
the owner (here, `MachineDeployment`) with the respective annotations 
(`status: failed` and `last-failed-attempt-at`), publishes helpful 
and informative events and trusts the single machine controller to do 
the retry and eventually succeed. When all the owned machines are 
upgraded as expected, the orchestrator considers the operation successful, 
marks the owner with `release` and `status: done` and steps down.

> To have a better understanding, let’s have a look the flow of the orchestrator:

Reviewer 3: Maybe "To paint a better picture" or "For a clearer picture" or "To better appreciate this" ?

```{figure} ../../assets/in-place-upgrades/orchestrated.png
   :width: 100%
   :alt: Orchestrated In-Place Upgrade Flow

   Orchestrated In-Place Upgrade Flow
```

> For the detailed implementation of this controller, make sure to checkout 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For the detailed implementation of this controller, make sure to check out 
```

the [{{product}} CAPI repository][capi-repo].

#### Locking The Upgrade Process

There might be scenarios where we need to make sure that only a limited 
number of machines are going to get upgraded at the same time. An example 
might be upgrading control plane machines. If multiple nodes become 

> unavailable due to getting upgraded, we might loose quorum, have a severe 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
unavailable due to getting upgraded, we might lose quorum, have a severe 
```

> unavailable due to getting upgraded, we might loose quorum, have a severe 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
unavailable due to getting upgraded, we might loose quorum, experience severe 
```
